update zjson spec and implementation (#1299)
brimsec/zq: zng/docs/zng-over-json.md

# ZNG over JSON

The ZNG data format has richly typed records and a deterministic column order.

> Thus, encoding ZNG directly onto JSON objects would not work without loss

Reviewer: Nit: "Encoding x onto y" reads oddly. Maybe "encoding ZNG directly into" or "mapping ZNG directly onto"?

of information.

> For example, consider this ZNG (in ZNG text format):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, consider this ZNG (in TZNG format):
```

```
#0:record[ts:time,a:string,b:record[x:int64,y:ip]]
0:[1521911721.926018012;hello, world;[4611686018427387904;127.0.0.1;]]
```
A straightforward translation to JSON might look like this:
```
{
  "ts": 1521911721.926018012,
  "a": "hello, world",
  "b": {
    "x": 4611686018427388000,
    "y": "127.0.0.1"
  }
}
```

> But, when this JSON is transmitted to a javascript client and parsed,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But, when this JSON is transmitted to a JavaScript client and parsed,
```

the result looks something like this:
```
{
  "ts": 1521911721.926018,
  "a": "hello, world",
  "b": {
    "x": 4611686018427388000,
    "y": "127.0.0.1"
  }
}
```
The good news is the `a` field came through just fine, but there are
a few problems with the remaining fields:

> * the timestamp lost precision (due to 53 bits of mantissa in a javascript

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* the timestamp lost precision (due to 53 bits of mantissa in a JavaScript
```

> IEEE floating point number) and was converted from a time type to a number,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
IEEE 754 floating point number) and was converted from a time type to a number,
```

* the int64 lost precision for the same reason, and
* the IP address has been converted to a string.

> As a comparison, the json python library handles the 64-bit integer to full

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a comparison, the Python's `json` module handles the 64-bit integer to full
```

precision, but loses precision on the floating point timestamp.
Also, as mentioned, it is at the whim of a JSON implementation whether
or not the order of object keys is preserved.

While JSON is well suited for data exchange of generic information, it is not

> so appropriate for structured data format like ZNG.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
so appropriate for a structured data format like ZNG.
```

> That said, JSON can be used an encoding format for ZNG by mapping ZNG data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That said, JSON can be used as an encoding format for ZNG by mapping ZNG data
```

onto a JSON-based protocol.  This allows clients like web apps or
electron apps to receive and understand ZNG and, with the help of client
libraries like [zealot](https://github.com/brimsec/brim/tree/master/zealot),
to be enabled with rich, structured ZNG types that are implemented on top of

> the basic javascript types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the basic JavaScript types.
```

In other words,
because JSON objects do not have a deterministic column order nor does JSON

> in general have typing beyond the basics (i.e., strings, floating-point numbers,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in general have typing beyond the basics (i.e., strings, floating point numbers,
```
For consistency.

objects, arrays, and booleans), we decided to encode the ZNG data format with
its embedded type model all in a layer above regular JSON.

## ZJSON

The format for representing ZNG in JSON is called ZJSON.
Converting ZNG to ZJSON and back results in a complete and accurate
restoration of the original ZNG.

The ZJSON data model follows that of the underlying ZNG model by embedding
type information in the stream: type definitions declare arbitrarily complex
and nested data types, and values are sent referencing the type information
recursively with small-integer type identifiers.

Since ZNG steams are self describing and type information is embedded
in the stream itself, the embedded types are likewise encoded in the
ZJSON format.

> A ZJSON stream defined as a sequence of JSON objects where each object

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A ZJSON stream is defined as a sequence of JSON objects where each object
```

represents a ZNG value.  Each object includes an identifier that denotes

> its type, or "schema".  A schema generically refers to the type of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
its type, or _schema_.  A schema generically refers to the type of the
```

> ZNG record that defined by a given JSON object.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ZNG record that is defined by a given JSON object.
```

Each object contains the following fields:

> * `id` a small integer encoded as a javascript number indicating the schema that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `id` a small integer encoded as a JSON number indicating the schema that
```

applies to this value,
* `values` a JSON array of strings and arrays encoded as defined below,
* `schema` an optional field encoding the type of this object's values
and the schema of all subsequent values that have the same identifier, as
defined below, and
* `aliases` a JSON array of objects that define bindings between string names
and ZNG types as defined below.

The ID provides a mapping to a type so that future values in the stream may
reference a schema by ID.  An implementation maintains a table to map schemas

> to types as it decodes values.  The ID's are scoped to the particular ZJSON

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to types as it decodes values.  The IDs are scoped to the particular ZJSON
```

data stream in which they are embedded and otherwise have no global persistence
or meaning.

> The form of each value has the following JSON structure:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Objects in a ZJSON stream have the following JSON structure:
```

```
{
        id: <id>,
        schema: <type>,
        aliases: [ <alias1>, <alias2>, ... <aliasn> ],

>         values: [ <val> ... [ <val>, ... ] ... ]

Reviewer: Nit: Put these in the same order in which they're defined above.

Author: The values depend on the aliases but ok.

Reviewer: Would it make more sense to maintain this order here but change the order in which the fields are defined?

}
```

### Type Encoding

The type format follows the terminology in the ZNG spec, where primitive types
represent concrete values like strings, integers, times, and so forth, while

> types are composed of primtive type and/or other complex types, e.g., records,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
complex types are composed of primitive type and/or other complex types, e.g., records,
```

sets, arrays, and unionsa.

> The ZJSON type encoding for a primitive type is simply its string name.
> For example, "int32" or "string".  Complex types are structured and are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ZJSON type encoding for a primitive type is simply its string name,
e.g., "int32" or "string".  Complex types are structured and are
```

> mapped onto JSON structure depending on the type.  For example,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
their mapping onto JSON depends on the type.  For example,
```

the ZNG type `record[s:string,x:int32]` has this JSON format:
```
{
  "type": "record",
  "of": [
    {
      "name": "s",
      "type": "string"
    },
    {
      "name": "x",
      "type": "int32"
    }
  ]
}
```

#### Record Type

> More formally, a ZNG record type is a JSON object of the form:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
More formally, a ZNG record type is a JSON object of the form
```
Since you wouldn't use a colon here if the example were inline.

```
{
        type: "record",
        of: [ <col1>, <col2>, ... <coln> ]
}
```

> where each of the `n` columns have the form

Reviewer: ```suggestion
where each of the `n` columns has the form
```

```
{
        name: <name>,
        type: <type>,
        of: <of>
}
```
and `<name>` is a string defining the ZNG column name, `<type>` is a string

> indicating a primitive type or complex type and `of` is an optional field

Reviewer: ```suggestion
indicating a primitive type or complex type, and `of` is an optional field
```

if `<type>` is a complex type where the `<of>` value is defined in accordance
with its complex type definition.

#### Array Type

> A ZNG array type is defined by a JSON object having the form:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A ZNG array type is defined by a JSON object having the form
```

```
{
        type: "array",
        of: <type>
}
```
where `<type>` is any ZJSON type described herein, i.e., a string for a primitive

> type or JSON object defining a complex type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
type or a JSON object defining a complex type.
```

#### Set Type

> A ZNG set type is defined by a JSON object having the form:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A ZNG set type is defined by a JSON object having the form
```

```
{
        type: "set",
        of: <type>
}
```
where `<type>` is any ZJSON type described herein.

#### Union type

> A ZNG union type is defined by a JSON object having the form:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A ZNG union type is defined by a JSON object having the form
```

```
{
        type: "union",
        of: [ <type1>, <type2>, ... <typen> ]
}
```
where `<type1>` through `<typen>` comprise the types of the union and

> code any ZJSON type described herein.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
encode any ZJSON type described herein.
```

### Alias Encoding

Aliases are encoded as a binding between a name and a ZNG type.

> A top-level object can define zero or more aliasas as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A top-level object can define zero or more aliases as follows:
```

```
{
        ...
        aliases: [ { <name1>:<type1>, <name2>:<type2>, ... <namen>:<typen> ]
        ...
}
```

> where `<name1>` etc are JSON strings and `<type1>` etc are ZNG types as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
where `<name1>` etc. are JSON strings and `<type1>` etc. are ZNG types as
```

defined above.

### Value Encoding

> The primitive values comprising an arbitrary complex ZNG data value are encoded

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The primitive values comprising an arbitrarily complex ZNG data value are encoded
```

> as a JSON array of strings mixed with nested JSON arrays where the nested structure
> of these arrays conform with the nested structure of the value's schema as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
as a JSON array of strings mixed with nested JSON arrays whose structure
conforms to the value's schema as follows:
```

* each record, array, and set is encoded as a JSON array of its composite values,
* a union is encoded as a string of the form '<selector:<value>>' where `selector`
is an integer string representing the positional index in the union's list of
types that specifies the type of `<value>`, which is a JSON string or array
as described recursively herein, and

> * each primitive is encoded as a string conforming to its text-ZNG representation,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* each primitive is encoded as a string conforming to its TZNG representation,
```

as described in the
[corresponding section of the ZNG specification](https://github.com/brimsec/zq/blob/master/zng/docs/spec.md#5-primitive-types).

For example, a record with three columns --- a string, an array of integers,
and an array of union of string, and float64 --- might have a value that looks like this:
```
[ "hello, world", ["1","2","3","4"], ["1:foo", "0:10" ] ]
```

## Framing ZJSON objects

A sequence of ZJSON objects may be framed in two primary ways.

> First, they can simply be a sequence of new-line delimited JSON where

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, they can simply be a sequence of newline delimited JSON where
```

> each object is transmitted as a single line terminated with a newline character,
> e.g., the [zq](https://github.com/brimsec/zq) CLI command  writes its

Reviewer: ```suggestion
each object is transmitted as a single line terminated with a newline character,
e.g., the [zq](https://github.com/brimsec/zq) CLI command writes its
```

ZJSON output as lines of NDJSON.

Second, the objects may be encoded in a JSON array embedded in some other
JSON-framed protocol, e.g., embedded in the the search results messages
of the [zqd REST API](https://github.com/brimsec/zq/blob/master/zqd/api/api.go).

> It is up to an implementation to understand the context for how the ZJSON
> objects are framed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is up to an implementation to understand how ZJSON objects are framed.
```

Author: Will rewrite.  This changes meaning.
